# Training with Targeted Activation Penalties (TAPs)
Dekai Zhang, Matthew Williams, Francesca Toni

This repository contains the code for our AAAI-24 paper: [Targeted Activation Penalties Help CNNs Ignore Spurious Signals](https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/29610). 

## Main idea

Neural networks (NNs) can learn to rely on spurious signals in the training data, leading to poor generalisation. Recent methods tackle this problem by training NNs with additional ground-truth annotations of such signals. These methods may, however, let spurious signals re-emerge in deep convolutional NNs (CNNs). We propose Targeted Activation Penalty (TAP), a new method tackling the same problem by penalising activations to control the re-emergence of spurious signals in deep CNNs, while also lowering training times and memory usage. In addition, ground-truth annotations can be expensive to obtain. We show that TAP still works well with annotations generated by pre-trained models as effective substitutes of ground-truth annotations. We demonstrate the power of TAP against two state-of-the-art baselines on the MNIST benchmark and on two clinical image datasets, using four different CNN architectures. 

## Project structure

The main code to train and evaluate models is in the root directory.
Data should be placed in a `data` directory.
Configs should be placed in a `configs` directory.

## Data

### MNIST

Run `python create_decoy_mnist.py` to download MNIST create the decoyed version of MNIST.

### PNEU

Download PNEU from [https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/rscbjbr9sj/3](https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/rscbjbr9sj/3) and place `chest_xray` in `data/pneu` which you may need to create.
Run `python create_pneu.py` to create PNEU with text and stripe artifacts.

### KNEE

Download KNEE from [https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/56rmx5bjcr/1](https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/56rmx5bjcr/1) and place kneeKL224 in `data`.
Run `python create_knee.py` to create KNEE with text and stripe artifacts.

## Training

To pre-train teacher models, use `pretrain.py`. Example usage:
```
python pretrain.py \
    --epochs 1 \
    --data pneu_RGB \
    --model_name resnet18 \
    --pretrained \
    --batch_size 16 \
    --num_workers 4 \
    --seed 0
```

To output explanations, fill out a `config.yaml` file (example provided at `configs/config.yaml`) and use `explain.py`. Example usage:
```
python explain.py --config configs/config.yaml
```

To train a student with XS, fill out a `config.yaml` file and use `teach.py`. Example usage:

```
python teach.py --config configs/config.yaml
```

To train a student with KD, fill out a `config.yaml` file and use `transfer.py`. Example usage:

```
python transfer.py --config configs/config.yaml
```

To train the models from the paper, run the scripts with seeds `0, 1, 2, 3, 4`. 
Note: additional argument options are listed in `src/args.py`.

## Evaluation

To evaluate the performance of a model, use `evaluate.py`
```
python evaluate.py \
    --model_path <path to model checkpoint> \
    --model_name resnet18 \
    --data pneu_text_RGB
```

To evaluate the overlap of the lowest input gradients and the spurious signals, use `explanation_overlap.py`. Example usage:
```
python explanation_overlap.py \
    --model_name resnet18 \
    --load_from <path to model checkpoint> \
    --dataset pneu_text_RGB \
    --mask_threshold 0.01 
```

To evaluate the overlap of the top input gradients and the spurious signals, use `explanation_overlap_ig.py`. Example usage:
```
python explanation_overlap_ig.py \
    --model_name resnet18 \
    --load_from <path to model checkpoint> \
    --dataset pneu_text_RGB \
    --mask_threshold 0.25
```

To evaluate the overlap of the top activations and the spurious signals, use `explanation_overlap_acts.py`. Example usage:
```
python explanation_overlap_acts.py \
    --model_name resnet18_activations \
    --load_from <path to model checkpoint> \
    --dataset pneu_text_RGB \
    --mask_threshold 0.25
```

## Cite us

```
@article{Zhang_Williams_Toni_2024,
	author = {Zhang, Dekai and Williams, Matt and Toni, Francesca},
	doi = {10.1609/aaai.v38i15.29610},
	journal = {Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence},
	month = {Mar.},
	number = {15},
	pages = {16705-16713},
	title = {Targeted Activation Penalties Help CNNs Ignore Spurious Signals},
	volume = {38},
	year = {2024}
}
```
